Vol.:(0123456789)
The Journal of Supercomputing          (2025) 81:280 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-024-06494-y
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer 
with an explainable AI‑based framework and its application 
in agriculture
Sadia Kamal1 · Parth Sharma2 · P . K. Gupta4 · Mohammad Khubeb Siddiqui2,5 · 
Ankush Singh3 · Abhijit Dutt1
Accepted: 2 October 2024 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2024
Abstract
Agriculture is one of the fundamental components of human civilization, contribut-
ing not only to food production but also to economic growth. Early identification of 
diseases in plants presents a significant challenge, as timely identification is crucial 
to increasing agricultural production. Incorporating the latest technology, such as 
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, in fields can reduce major losses for farmers 
and also improve productivity. In this paper, we have proposed a Deep Vision trans-
former and an Explainable AI (XAI)-based technique to address various diseases in 
plants. Here, we have used the dataset “Plant Village" as a case study that focuses on 
two majorly grown crops like: potatoes and tomatoes. In addition, we have analysed 
nine diseases that affect these crops around the world, with tomatoes showing six 
different conditions and potatoes affected by three bacterial diseases. The proposed 
DVTXAI framework incorporates the Deep vision transforms to identify plant dis-
eases at an early stage. In the experiments, the proposed model achieves an accu-
racy of 93.56% for tomatoes and 99.95% for potatoes. Additionally, to make model 
‘Trustworthy’, we make model Explainable, which reveals the transparency mecha-
nism that helps the farmer to make the right decision at an early stage of the crop.
Keywords AI in Agriculture · Trustworthy AI · Explainable AI (XAI) · Plant 
Disease Identification · Transformer Learning · SHAP
1 Introduction
In light of ongoing population expansion and limited resources, it is urgently neces-
sary to consistently supervise agricultural operations using AI/ML. This is vital to 
optimize food production efficiency, while protecting natural ecosystems. Agricul-
ture is one of the cornerstones of human civilization, providing food, livelihoods, 
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 2 of 32
and economic stability to societies worldwide. From vast fields of staple crops to 
specialized plantations and agro-industries, agriculture encompasses a diverse array 
of practices, cultures, and ecosystems. Sustainability, in many countries, agriculture 
forms the backbone of their economies, providing food to the people and raw mate-
rials to various industries. The challenges faced by the agricultural sector are mul-
tifaceted, ranging from climate change-induced changes in the growing seasons to 
the evolving demands of a growing global population. The ability to consistently 
produce high-quality crops is closely intertwined with a nation’s capacity to ensure 
the health and vitality of its plants.
Agriculture significantly contributes to India’s economy, with 54.6% of the work-
force engaged in agricultural and related activities, as per the 2011 Census and high-
lighted in the 2023–2024 annual report by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare [1]. The loss of crop production is often attributed to factors such as weeds, 
pests, and diseases, which are responsible for 15–25% of the total loss of crop pro-
duction in India. The demand for efficient farming processes in agriculture and the 
food industries is rapidly increasing, but various plant diseases affect this process. 
Identifying and addressing plant diseases in large crop fields is a complex task that 
requires the use of optical observation of leaves and the expertise of skilled man-
power [2–4]. This task is particularly challenging for both farmers and individuals 
without experience in the field, as visual judgment of disease classification can con-
tain bias, optical misinterpretations, and errors. The use of image processing tools 
has become necessary to facilitate the identification of plant diseases [5]. Making 
use of image processing and computer vision techniques, we can identify plant dis-
eases in their early stages.
Several researchers and scientists have identified the salient issues and challenges 
associated with the analysis of plant diseases [6, 7].
1.1  Significance of deep learning in plant disease classification
Traditional disease classification methods have proven to be labour intensive, time 
consuming, and often prone to inaccuracies. In this context, the emergence of deep 
learning techniques has revolutionized the field of plant disease classification, offer-
ing promising solutions to more efficient and accurate disease diagnosis.
Deep learning, a subset of machine learning, has garnered immense attention in 
diverse applications due to its ability to automatically learn intricate patterns and 
features from large-scale data [8, 9]. It has proven its mettle in image recognition, 
natural language processing, and speech recognition and has now found its way into 
agriculture to tackle challenges in plant disease identification. Unlike traditional 
machine learning techniques, deep learning models, especially Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (CNNs), have the inherent ability to automatically extract hierarchi-
cal representations from raw data, which makes them well suited for image analysis 
tasks [10]. This property makes CNNs particularly effective in identifying complex 
patterns and subtle visual cues present in images of diseased plants, allowing accu-
rate disease identification and classification [11]. The use of deep learning tech-
niques for the identification of plant diseases offers numerous advantages. Firstly, 
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 3 of 32   280 
it significantly reduces the time and effort required for diagnosis, allowing for early 
identification and rapid response to disease outbreaks. Secondly, deep learning mod-
els have demonstrated remarkable accuracy rates, often exceeding those of human 
experts in disease identification. This enhanced precision minimizes misdiagnoses, 
which is crucial for minimizing unnecessary pesticide use and its associated envi-
ronmental impacts.
Recent studies in image processing have shown that Vision Transformers (ViTs) 
[12] and other hybrid architectures combining ViTs with CNNs outperform tradi-
tional CNNs in several key areas. Vision Transformers, leveraging self-attention 
mechanisms, excel in handling images with noise and augmentation by maintaining 
robust performance under varied conditions. They offer a comprehensive analysis of 
image data from all layers, unlike CNNs, which may lose spatial information through 
clustering operations. Furthermore, ViTs are more efficient, requiring fewer com-
putational resources and less training time, particularly when fine-tuning. Although 
CNNs still demonstrate superior generalization with smaller datasets, ViTs gain an 
edge by effectively learning from fewer images due to their patch-based approach, 
which allows for a richer interplay of image features. This nuanced understanding of 
the strengths and weaknesses of each architecture paves the way for a more targeted 
and efficient use of these models in practical applications.
In the present work, we have proposed a vision image transformer learning model 
to explain the identification of plant disease together with SHAP, which will allow 
the identification of those who have leaf disease due to bacterial infection from envi-
ronmental change. The proposed model eliminates the shortcomings of traditional 
neural network modes such as CNNs, capsule networks, etc. The main contributions 
of this paper can be summarized as follows: 
1. We have applied the deep vision transformer model to identify diseases on potato 
and tomato plants.
2. We have obtained higher accuracy on multi classes, i.e., for potato three class 
values, and tomato, six class values.
3. We categorized the results into healthy, early blight, and late blight classifications 
and used the SHAP library to improve the model’s explainability.
The remainder of the paper is organized into the following sections. Section  2 
reviews, with critical analysis, different approaches to deep learning and machine 
learning to identify plant diseases. Section  3 explains the methodology, comprising 
dataset description, augmentation, performance evaluation, etc. Section  4 presents 
the proposed framework and Algorithm of DeepViT for plant disease identifica-
tion model and the explanation of each step. Section  5 provides the Explainable AI 
(XAI) feature on DeepViT using SHAP algorithm to identify the dominant features 
and making model explainable. Section  6 presents the experimental results and its 
discussion. Finally, Sect. 7 concludes the paper.
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 4 of 32
2  Machine learning in plant disease identification: a brief review
Digital image processing techniques have been quite prominent in different AI appli-
cations, as they are capable of performing actions such as identifying the required 
focal point (set of pixels) of the image and its classification. Similarly, its applica-
tions are widely known in agriculture for the identification of plant diseases [13–17].
In recent times, image processing, machine learning, and deep learning for auto-
matically identifying crop diseases have gained increasing attention and importance.
2.1  Plant disease identification via traditional machine learning classifiers
Researchers have explored various image processing and machine learning tech-
niques to identify plant diseases.
In [18], SVM-based image processing approach was used to analyse and classify 
prevalent diseases in rice crops, and achieved an accuracy of 94.16%. In the oil palm 
industry, no table economic losses caused by leaf diseases led to a study combining 
k-means clustering and a multiclass SVM classifier, achieving accuracies of 97%, 
and 95% respectively [19]. In [20], a method for the classification and identification 
of bean diseases was introduced, achieving an accuracy of 98.6% combining image 
segmentation, feature extraction, and machine learning. For soybean culture, [21] 
proposed a semi-automatic leaf disease classification system using image processing 
techniques, providing a practical solution for early identification and management 
of plant health issues. In [22], a neural network-based method was developed for 
the identification of plant diseases, achieving impressive prediction accuracy, reach-
ing 100% for wheat and grape diseases. In [23], used the colour, texture and shape 
features with the SVM classifier to achieve an accuracy of 96.3% for the identifica-
tion of plant diseases. In [24], introduced a method to recognize cucumber diseases 
using superpixels, the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm, and the features of 
PHOG, achieving a precision of 94.29% in a leaf image database with cucumber dis-
eases. Sannakki et al. [25] used neural networks to diagnose and classify grape leaf 
diseases with an accuracy of 92.11%. In [26], a fuzzy logic-based method was pro-
posed to identification and classify leaf diseases with an accuracy of 91.25%. In [27] 
used image processing techniques and the SVM classifier, achieving an accuracy 
of 90.63% to classify plant leaf diseases. In [28], applied K-means clustering, con-
tour tracing and machine learning approaches (SVM, K-NN, and CNN) to classify 
tomato leaf diseases, demonstrating effective performance in real-time processing 
scenarios. CNNs were also used as feature descriptors in combination with SVMs 
in another study [29]. In [30], presented a survey of the techniques used to classify 
diseases in plant leaves, achieving an average accuracy of 97.6% with an image seg-
mentation algorithm. Another survey [17] provided an overview of key phases in the 
classification of plant diseases, achieving an overall precision of around 93% using 
the k-means segmentation technique.
Similarly, non-black-box classifiers - Random Forest and Histogram of Oriented 
Gradients (HOG) - were used to identify papaya leaf diseases [31]. Despite the chal-
lenges posed by variations in leaf images, the approach achieved a precision of 70%.
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 5 of 32   280 
However, all of the above approaches suffer from a common and inherent draw -
back of Non-Deep Learning approaches, i.e. manual feature extraction. Manual fea-
ture extraction is a very tedious task, increases the complexity of data preparation, 
and more importantly makes it difficult to extend the current study to cover more 
disease classes, as that might require us to do a completely new feature extraction 
process from scratch.
2.2  Plant disease identification via deep learning
Recent studies have shown the potential of deep learning techniques in plant disease 
identification. Barbedo et al. [32] improved accuracy by 12% by analysing individ-
ual lesions and spots rather than whole leaves, which increased data variability and 
enabled the identification of multiple diseases on the same leaf. Similarly, Fuentes 
et al. [33] developed a robust deep learning-based classifier for real-time recogni-
tion of tomato plant diseases and pests, achieving effective results even in complex 
scenarios. Ferentinos et al. [34] further demonstrated the effectiveness of convolu-
tional neural networks, achieving a 99.53% success rate in identifying plant-disease 
combinations, highlighting the model’s potential as a valuable tool for real-world 
cultivation systems. Similarly, deep learning techniques have been applied to diverse 
crop species, such as sunflower crops in Italy [35], where deep CNN and vegetation 
indices were used to improve segmentation performance, evaluated using the Mean 
Intersection over Union (MIoU) metric. For crop disease identification, specific 
crops have been the focus of research, such as maize leaf diseases, where improved 
deep learning models based on GoogLeNet and Cifar10 achieved high average 
accuracies of 98.9% and 98.8%, respectively [36]. Other studies targeted individual 
crops, such as cardamom plant leaf diseases, using U2-Net for background removal 
and EfficientNetV2 for classification, resulting in a remarkable maximum accuracy 
of 98.26% [37]. In a similar vein, an effective deep CNN model achieved 98% clas-
sification accuracy to identify apple leaf diseases [38]. In the context of crop spe-
cies discrimination, Eddy et al. [39] compared the neural networks (NN) and maxi-
mum likelihood (MLC) classifiers. NN classification showed slight improvements 
over MLC in all cases, indicating the potential of neural networks in this domain. 
Using publicly available data sets, Liu et al. [40] achieved an accuracy of 99.34% 
on a held-out test set using a deep convolutional neural network, demonstrating the 
feasibility of using deep learning for the classification of diseased and healthy plant 
leaves. Furthermore, the integration of neural networks (CNNs) has proven effective 
in identifying diseases in citrus fruits and leaves [41]. The proposed CNN model 
achieved a high test accuracy of 94.55%, making it a valuable decision support tool 
for farmers looking to classify citrus fruit and leaf diseases.
Despite these advancements, several challenges remain. Eddy et  al. [39] noted 
that neural networks, while slightly outperforming traditional classifiers, still face 
limitations in certain scenarios. Issues such as computational cost and the need for 
large annotated datasets, as seen in the work of Hassan et al. [42], and the complex-
ity of architectures like those proposed by Zhou et al. [43], present ongoing obstacles 
in the practical application of deep learning models for plant disease identification. 
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 6 of 32
Additionally, the variability in performance across different environmental condi-
tions and the requirement for extensive computational resources can hinder the scal-
ability of these models. Furthermore, the black-box nature of deep learning models 
often limits their interpretability, which is crucial for gaining the trust of agricultural 
practitioners and ensuring widespread adoption.
2.3  Plant disease identification using transformers
In our study, we delve into the utilization of Vision Transformers (ViTs) for 
advanced computer vision tasks, showcasing their potential to outperform tradi-
tional convolutional neural network (CNN)-based models. Dosovitskiy and col-
leagues (2020) developed the first Vision Transformer (ViT), a model capable of 
understanding global relationships between pixels via self-attention (SA) mecha-
nisms [44]. Vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged with superior performance 
on computer vision tasks compared to the CNN-based models as it revolutionize 
image classification by treating images as sequences of patch tokens, akin to how 
transformers process sequences of words in natural language processing (NLP). This 
approach allows ViTs to capture global relationships among pixels through self-
attention mechanisms, facilitating the learning of long-range dependencies.
The Vision Transformer (ViT) represents a groundbreaking shift in neural net-
work training for image analysis also. Demonstrating superior accuracy over 
ResNet-152 on various classification benchmarks such as ImageNet, CIFAR-100, 
and Oxford-IIIT Pets, ViT notably outperforms models like Noisy Student (Effi-
cientNet-L2). Drawing inspiration from seminal works in NLP, including the BERT 
and “Attention Is All You Need" papers, ViT leverages the attention mechanism to 
process visual data. Initially, ViT extracts 2D patches from images and reshapes 
them into 1D arrays suitable for the transformer’s architecture. These arrays are 
then combined with positional encodings to maintain the spatial hierarchy of the 
patches. After normalization, the data passes through the transformer block, where 
the multi-head attention layer plays a pivotal role. This layer assigns weights to pri-
oritize more significant regions within the image, focusing the model’s attention on 
crucial features. The output is a weighted linear combination from each attention 
head, showcasing the model’s refined focus and analytical capabilities.
In addition to the advancements in Vision Transformers (ViTs) for computer 
vision tasks, deep learning models, particularly CNNs, have made significant strides 
in automating plant disease detection by identifying and classifying plant images. 
Leveraging datasets such as PlantVillage, CNN-based architectures like DenseNet, 
ResNet, and EfficientNet have achieved outstanding results, with accuracy rates sur-
passing 96%. However, these models grapple with challenges like overfitting and 
optimizing hyperparameters when applied to novel or diverse datasets. To address 
these issues, ensemble methods such as PDDNet-AE and PDDNet-LVE have 
improved robustness, reaching accuracies as high as 97.79%. Yet, these methods 
face obstacles, including high computational costs and difficulties in deploying them 
for real-time use in the field [45]. Similarly, inception-based models like Small-
Inception have demonstrated considerable effectiveness in binary classification 
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 7 of 32   280 
tasks, achieving 94.04% accuracy in distinguishing between healthy and unhealthy 
plants; however, ensuring their generalizability across various environments remains 
a significant hurdle [46]. Moreover, models such as PDDNet-Tomato have reached 
91.14% accuracy in one-vs-all classification of tomato diseases, showing potential 
but highlighting scalability and consistency issues across different crop types and 
disease conditions [47]. Recent advances, including E-GreenNet based on Mobile-
NetV3Small, have further pushed the boundaries of plant disease detection, achiev -
ing an impressive 99.8% accuracy in binary classification of healthy vs infected 
plants. Nonetheless, this high accuracy, primarily derived from a single dataset 
like PlantVillage, underscores the model’s limitations in adapting to large-scale, 
real-time agricultural applications across diverse settings [48]. While these mod-
els exhibit promise, they collectively highlight the ongoing challenges of improv -
ing scalability, generalization across environments, and computational efficiency to 
develop practical and adaptable plant disease detection systems.
3  Methodology
In this section, we have presented the proposed model for identifying plant diseases. 
This framework utilizes image data sets for both potato and tomato, as shown in 
Figs.  1 and 2. The process consists of four steps that include the capture of images, 
data enrichment, implementation of the proposed DeepViT framework, and an AI 
explainable model using SHAP.
3.1  Dataset description
The Plant  Villa ge datas et [49] consists of images of many different crops. However, 
for experimentation purposes, we have selected images of tomato and potato crops. 
The sample of crop leaves with disease are shown in Fig.  3 and  4. These selections 
are based on their agricultural importance and the prevalence of various diseases 
within these species, making them ideal crops to assess the efficacy of advanced 
machine learning approaches in disease classification. This dataset is also known 
for its extensive collection of images of plant leaves documenting various states of 
disease. Initially, it had 54,305 images; after data augmentation processes such as 
image flipping, gamma correction, noise injection, PCA colour augmentation, rota-
tion, and scaling, it has a total of 61,486 images [50]. From the data set taken, the 
tomato data set includes images of 5 different diseases, together with images of 
healthy leaves, as shown in Fig.  3. Similarly, for the potato dataset, there are three 
classes, two distinct diseases, and a healthy class, as shown in Fig.  4. The class dis-
tribution for tomatoes and potatoes diseases within the data set is shown in Table  1. 
Table  2 defines the class values distribution in potato dataset, and Table  3 defines 
the class value distribution in tomato dataset, the pictorial representation of class 
values distribution is shown in Fig.  2. The dataset also offers a default proportion of 
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 8 of 32
Fig. 1  Workflow for Image Classification in Crop Disease Identification using DeepViT Model
Table 1  Dataset description: 
Total number of images in each 
class
Plant Classes Num-
ber of 
Images
Tomato Healthy 2407
Early Blight 2400
Late Blight 2314
Bacterial Spot 2130
Septoria Leaf Spot 2181
Yellow Leaf Curl Virus 2451
Potato Healthy 2283
Early Blight 2424
Late Blight 2421
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 9 of 32   280 
division between the training, validation, and testing data subsets, which we have not 
changed to prevent changing the distribution of the images in the different subsets. 
3.2  Data pre‑processing
Upon completion of the data collection, a comprehensive preprocessing routine 
has been implemented to ensure the uniformity and quality of the data set. This 
helps reduce potential sources of bias and variance, thus improving the reliabil-
ity of sub-analyses. For this, we have created a Python script using ‘pytorch’ 
Table 2  Distribution of Images 
in Potato Dataset Plant Classes Train Valid Test
Potato Early Blight 1939 436 49
Late Blight 1939 436 46
Healthy 1824 410 49
Table 3  Distribution of Images 
in Tomato Dataset Plant Classes Train Valid Test
Tomato Healthy 1939 436 49
Early Blight 1939 436 48
Late Blight 1824 410 47
Bacterial Spot 1824 410 43
Yellow Leaf Curl Virus 1824 410 49
Septoria Leaf Spot 1824 410 44
Fig. 2  Distribution of images among classes in (a) potato, (b) tomato
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 10 of 32
library package to image samples. This script enables the scaling of all the col-
lected images to a specific dimension of 256 ×256 pixels. This resizing was criti-
cal to normalizing the dimensions of the input data, facilitating consistent pro-
cessing and analysis throughout the entire data set.
Fig. 3  Samples of tomato leaf diseases (a) Healthy, (b) Early Blight, (c) Late Blight, (d) Bacterial Spot, 
(e) Septoria Leaf Spot, (f) Yellow leaf Curl Virus
Fig. 4  Samples of Potato leaf diseases (a) Healthy, (b) Early Blight, (c) Late Blight
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 11 of 32   280 
3.3  Data augmentation
The input dataset size is crucial for evaluating the performance of deep learning mod-
els. Insufficient input data can lead to overfitting, resulting in poor validation results. 
Therefore, when require, we need to increase the dataset synthetically by applying dif-
ferent data augmentation methods, such as flipping, rotating, etc. This diversification of 
the data set enhances the robustness, generalization, and applicability of the models and 
algorithms trained on it. Vision Transformers are vulnerable to overfitting like other 
Deep Learning models, and one of the crucial steps in training ViTs is to take necessary 
precautions to prevent overfitting and employ necessary mechanisms to check whether 
the model has overfit. To explain briefly, overfitting is the tendency of a model to mem-
orize certain patterns within the training data rather than learning them properly, in 
such cases the model fails to generalize to unknown data, which was not a part of the 
training data set. There are many ways to prevent overfitting in a model, one of them is 
to increase the variety of input data, we have utilized data augmentation to achieve this 
objective. Within our training pipeline, and we have employed: image flipping; cutout, 
which involves removing random patches of pixels from the data resulting in the fea-
tures corresponding to those cutout patches being omitted from the network; and finally 
colour jitter which allows us to add variation to the image by randomly changing its 
brightness, saturation, and contrast. By appending the Augmented Data to the original 
data we have managed to increase the training data by 300% as seen in Table 4.
3.4  Transformer architectures: ViT and DeepViT
Transformers process input sequences-typically token embeddings-through multiple 
layers, each consisting of a multi-head self-attention mechanism that uses dot-product 
attention to integrate information across tokens, and a token-wise feed-forward layer 
(MLP). Both components are enhanced by layer normalization and residual connec-
tions to improve learning dynamics and stability. 
The Vision Transformer (ViT) [52] employs the same Transformer architecture pre-
viously mentioned, but introduces a distinct approach in its image preprocessing layer. 
In order to capture global dependencies in the image, ViT substitutes self-attention 
techniques for the conventional convolutional layers. This method outperforms tra-
ditional CNN-based models in certain tasks, as evidenced by its encouraging perfor-
mance in some benchmark datasets [51, 53]. The VIT architecture is made up of vari-
ous significant layers, and an image is divided into a series of non-overlapping patches, 
which are then linearly projected based on a learned transformation. This makes it 
possible for the model to process the image more effectively. Furthermore, ViT incor-
porates a transformer encoder that makes use of self-attention methods in order to 
Table 4  Data Augmentation in 
the Training Data Dataset Original Augmented
Tomato 11108 44432
Potato 5702 22808
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 12 of 32
effectively represent features by capturing long-range dependencies between patches. 
ViT has a special CLS token at the beginning of the input sequence, which is used to 
derive the representation needed for the final classification task.
In the rapidly evolving field of deep learning, the introduction of the Deep Vision 
Transformer (DeepViT) [51] marks a significant development in the field of image 
classification. Building upon the foundational Vision Transformer (ViT), DeepViT 
integrates a cutting-edge mechanism known as Re-attention, as shown in Fig.  5. It 
effectively replaces the conventional layers of self-attention. This modification plays 
a significant role in addressing the attention-collapse problem that commonly occurs 
when scaling ViT architectures to increased depths [51]. The Re-attention mechanism 
regenerates the attention maps in the multi-head self-attention (MHSA) framework, 
promoting dynamic and learnable interactions among the various attention heads. This 
enhances the architecture’s ability to discern complex relationships within images.
3.5  Performance evaluation
Confusion matrix has been widely used to evaluate classification problems as it 
provides measures such as accuracy, precision, recall, f-measure, etc. They play a 
significant role in the evaluation of the model based on the data set and the prob-
lem specification. It is a 2 × 2 matrix each cell of the matrix represents the model 
Fig. 5  Basic Architecture of 
DeepViT [51]

DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 13 of 32   280 
classification rate which is represented by – True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), 
False Positive(FP), and False Negative(FN) [54, 55].
Using these four performance evaluation parameters, Eqs.  1,  2,  3 and  4 are cal-
culated, each representing the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of the model, 
respectively. 
1.  True Positive (TP): If a plant is infected with the disease, the Deep-ViT classifier 
also classifies it as infected.
2. True Negative (TN): if a plant is not infected with a disease and the Deep-ViT 
classifier is also classified as not infected.
3. False Positive (FP): If a plant is not infected with the disease, the Deep-ViT clas-
sifier is also classified as infected.
4. False Negative (FN): If a plant is infected with disease, the Deep-ViT classifier 
also classifies it as not infected.
Accuracy: It quantifies the proportion of correctly classified pixels relative to 
the total pixel count in an image. Although this metric provides a global meas-
ure of model accuracy, it does not account for class imbalances, which could 
skew the interpretation of model performance.
Precision: ratio of true positive observations to total predicted positives. This met-
ric is crucial in determining the accuracy of the model in identifying only relevant 
instances.
 where TP denotes True Positives and FP denotes False Positives.
Recall: Recall, also known as Sensitivity, measures the proportion of actual 
positives that are correctly identified by the model. This metric is essential for 
assessing the completeness of positive predictions.
 where FN represents False Negatives.
F-measure: The F1-Score combines precision and recall into a single metric, 
offering a balanced assessment of segmentation performance.
(1)Accuracy = TP + TN
TP + FP + FN + TN × 100%
(2)Precision = TP
TP + FP × 100%,
(3)Recall∕Senstivity = TP
TP + FN × 100%,
(4)F − measure = 2 ⋅ Precision ⋅ Recall
Precision + Recall × 100%
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 14 of 32
3.5.1  Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
In this study, the performance of the Plant Village dataset was evaluated by cal-
culating the area under the ROC  curve, also known as the area under the curve 
(AUC). The performance of the model is assessed by using metrics such as the 
confusion matrix, sensitivity, specificity, and precision. The ROC is plotted 
between sensitivity and specificity, and the curve value lies between 0 and 1.0, 
if the AUC value is closer to 1.0, this indicates that the model has high perfor -
mance [56, 57] .
4  Proposed framework: DVTXAI
For the proposed Deep-ViT model, in this section we present an overview of the 
architecture and the various components of our proposed framework. Following is 
the flow of proposed model shown in Fig. 6: 
 (i) Input image patches: The proposed model initially segments the input dataset 
images-specifically, potatoes and tomatoes-into smaller sections. Each image, 
with dimensions of 256 × 256 pixels, is divided into non-overlapping patches 
of 32 × 32 pixels. This segmentation strategy serves to simplify the processing 
of large image inputs, while preserving the capacity to model intricate spatial 
interactions. Patch size can be adjusted according to the hyperparameter set-
tings that consider the dimensions of the input image.: rewrite this for research 
paper.
 (ii) Patch embedding: After patches, they are converted through the linear 
embedding process into a sequence of vectors suitable for processing by the 
transformer. This setup involves a patch embedding layer that acts as a transla-
tor, converting the image patches into a numerical sequence so that the trans-
former can interpret them. This layer includes a linear transformation, a ReLU 
function is used to enhance the practical utility of the numbers, and a dropout 
layer to prevent overfitting by omitting random information during training, 
Fig. 6  Proposed Framework for Potato and tomato Disease classification
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 15 of 32   280 
this helps the model to manage unpredictability and improve its predictive 
accuracy.
 (iii) Positional encoding: It is a technique that enhances each input vector within a 
sequence by integrating a fixed vector defined by its position. The integration 
of positional encoding within the Vision Transformer (ViT) model serves the 
purpose of retaining the spatial information present in the input image and 
improves the contextual meaning of the patch embeddings.
 (iv) Deep vision transformer: The Deep ViT block plays a crucial role in the pro-
posed architecture by managing the sequence of patch embeddings and effec-
tively capturing their interconnections. The encoder block comprises three 
components: a re-attention layer, a feed-forward neural network (FFNN), and 
additional multi-head re-attention layers. The multi-head attention layers are 
integral to the transformer architecture, enabling the model to comprehend the 
relationships between different parts of the input sequence of patches. 
 In Eq.  5 defines the basic operation of the scaled dot-product attention, 
where the attention function calculates the dot products of the query Q with 
keys K, normalizes these by the square root of the key dimensionality dk , and 
applies softmax to get the weights for the values V . This normalization stabi-
lizes training gradients and allows the model to focus dynamically on differ -
ent parts of the input, which is essential for understanding the input image. 
Equation  6 defines multi-head attention allows each “head” to process the 
input with distinct sets of learned projections WQ
i  , WK
i  , and WV
i  . This con-
figuration enables the model to capture diverse features from different sub-
spaces, enhancing its ability to represent and focus on various aspects of the 
input sequence comprehensively. Finally different multiple attention heads 
are then combined by concatenating their outputs, which is then multiplied 
by an additional learned projection WO as shown in Eq.  7. The multi-head 
self-attention mechanism is a key component of transformer architectures, 
enabling them to effectively handle a wide range of complex tasks, such as 
machine translation, text summarization, and context-sensitive information 
retrieval.
   In this finding, a multi-head attention mechanism with four heads works 
better on our dataset. This allows the model to process various aspects of the 
patches simultaneously, enhancing the representation of features. The re-atten-
tion layer measures the similarity between elements in the sequence, creating 
a weighted combination of this information. This process is repeated multiple 
(5)Attention(Q,K, V)=softmax
�
QKT
√
dk
�
V
(6)headi = Attention(QWQ
i , KWK
i , VWV
i )
(7)MSA(Q, K, V)= Concat(head1, … , headh)WO
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 16 of 32
times, starting from different points to explore similarities. The results are then 
concatenated and linearly transformed to produce the final outcome. This is 
then passed on to the next step in the feedforward layer, where each neuron in 
one layer is connected to every neuron in the same layer. This consists of two 
linear layers connected by a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function. 
This design helps the network to effectively combine and represent the non-
linear relationships between the input patches.
4.1  Classification layer
The Vision Transformer (ViT) model generates its results by taking the output from 
the second multihead reattention layer, passing it through a linear layer, and then 
applying a softmax activation function. The softmax function converts the input into 
a probability distribution between multiple classes, allowing the model to provide a 
likelihood distribution that encompasses potential outcomes.
In the present work, we have performed the classification with multi-headed self-
attention mechanism on the dataset that comprises four heads. Using multiple atten-
tion heads in transformers enhances their expressive power and modelling capabili-
ties. This allows the model to process various aspects of the patches simultaneously, 
enhancing the representation of features. Additionally, a configuration with four 
sequentially arranged transformer blocks emerged as the most effective, striking a 
balance between model complexity and performance. This customized setup of the 
DeepViT model, which consists of four attention heads and four transformer blocks, 
showed superior performance, confirming its effectiveness for the characteristics of 
our data set and the designated classification tasks.
Similar to how a typical transformer breaks down a string of text into words, a 
vision transformer breaks down the input image into patches. Patches are equal-
sized squares of pixels; thus, during patching the image is broken down into multiple 
patches. This is done to reduce the computational complexity, while retaining the 
quality of the image with any given input size. In order to input these patches into 
the encoder, the patches are flattened into a single low-dimensional vector. While, 
this flattening allows the vision transformer to treat patches as a transformer would 
treat words (as a low-dimensional vector), it also results in a loss of positional infor-
mation, i.e., the spatial order within the patches. This issue is addressed by applying 
positional encoding to the patches; this is done via sinusoidal encoding, wherein 
sine and cosine functions are used to create a position-specific vector for each patch; 
this vector stores the relative location of the patch within the image.
Further analysis was performed to compare the classification results between spe-
cific pairs of subclasses within each crop category. Notably, the results for the pairs 
of ’healthy’ versus ’early blight’ and ’early blight’ versus ’late blight’ were analysed 
to assess the discriminative ability of the model between closely related disease 
states and healthy specimens. This comparative approach provided deeper insight 
into the efficacy of the model and potential areas for improvement in distinguishing 
between subtle variations in plant health and disease manifestations.
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 17 of 32   280 
4.2  Algorithm: Deep vision transformer
Algorithm. 1  Deep vision transformer
The deep vision transformer (ViT) algorithm is an advanced model designed for 
image classification tasks using a transformer-based architecture. It begins by taking 
an input The RGB image is divided into non-overlapping square patches of a speci-
fied size, such as 16 × 16 or 32 × 32 pixels. Each patch is then flattened to a vector 
and projected into a lower-dimensional space, defined by the embedding dimension, 
using a linear layer. These projected vectors, known as patch embeddings, are stored 
sequentially.
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 18 of 32
To retain spatial information about the position of each patch within the original 
image, positional encodings are generated and added to the patch embeddings. A 
unique learnable class token, which has the same dimensionality as the embeddings, 
is initialized and prepended to the sequence of patch embeddings. This class token 
plays a crucial role in the classification process, as it eventually holds the aggregate 
information needed for prediction.
The heart of the ViT algorithm lies in the transformer encoder, which consists of 
multiple layers specified by the user. Each layer within the transformer encoder per-
forms several key operations. First, multihead self-attention is applied to the patch 
embeddings, allowing the model to simultaneously focus on different parts of the image 
and capture complex relationships between patches. Following self-attention, layer 
normalization and residual connections are employed to stabilize and enhance the 
learning process. Next, a feedforward neural network, which includes linear transfor-
mations and activation functions, is applied to the output of the self-attention mecha-
nism. This is followed again by layer normalization and residual connections, ensuring 
that the transformations are effectively integrated.
After passing through all transformer layers, the class token is extracted from the 
sequence of patch embeddings. This token, now enriched with information from the 
entire image, is fed through a final linear layer to produce the class scores. These scores 
represent the model predictions, indicating the likelihood that the input image belongs 
to each possible class.
5  Explainable deepViT using SHAP
5.1  General introduction to SHAP
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) uses principles from cooperative game theory 
to explain the predictions of machine learning models. By drawing from the concept of 
Shapley values, which allocate "payouts" to players based on their contribution to the 
collective success in game theory, SHAP assigns an importance value to each feature 
based on its contribution to a prediction. This methodology, first introduced by Lund-
berg et al. in 2017 [58], offers a consistent and locally accurate explanation framework, 
providing insight into the general importance of characteristics across the model as 
well as detailed explanations for individual predictions.
The methodology operates by calculating the average marginal contribution of each 
characteristic to the predicted outcome. This is particularly illustrative in tasks like 
image classification, where the impact of each pixel is visualized through scores: red 
pixels typically indicate an increase in the probability of correct classification, whereas 
blue pixels indicate a decrease. Such detailed pixel-based analysis is crucial in applica-
tions such as diagnosing diseases in mulberry leaves, where understanding of feature 
contributions guides better model interpretations. The calculation of SHAP values is 
fundamentally based on the Shapley value concept from cooperative game theory:
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 19 of 32   280 
In this context, /u1D719i denotes the SHAP value corresponding to feature i, capturing the 
contribution of feature i to the overall model prediction. The set N encompasses all 
features within the model, while M signifies a subset of N that excludes feature i 
(i.e., M ⊆ N ⧵ {i} ). The factor /uni007C.varM/uni007C.var!⋅(/uni007C.varN/uni007C.var−/uni007C.varM/uni007C.var−1)!
/uni007C.varN/uni007C.var! serves as a weighting mechanism, 
accounting for all potential permutations of the features within subset M as well as 
those outside it. This ensures that every possible subset is fairly considered in the 
calculation of /u1D719i . The function fM (xM ) represents the model’s prediction based solely 
on the features included in subset M, with xM referring to the corresponding input 
features. In contrast, fM∪{ i} (xM∪{ i} ) indicates the model’s prediction when feature i is 
additionally included, with xM∪{i} being the relevant input features for this expanded 
subset. For ease of SHAP implementation, each feature xi in the model is substituted 
by a binary indicator b0
i  , indicating the presence or absence of xi . Consequently, the 
model can be represented in a simplified form:
Here, /u1D7190 denotes the bias term, which represents the model’s output when no fea-
tures are present (i.e., when all b0
i  are zero). The term /u1D719ib0
i  captures the contribu-
tion of each feature i to the model’s prediction, conditional on whether the feature is 
included or not. The parameter A indicates the total number of features incorporated 
into the simplified model, l(b0) , which acts as a substitute for the original model f(x). 
This substitution aids in understanding how individual features influence the overall 
prediction.
5.2  Application of SHAP on plant disease identification
Our research strives to advance the interpretability of AI within the sphere of plant 
disease identification, using Transformer learning models. The intricacies of Trans-
former architectures necessitate a comprehensive understanding of their decision-
making processes, especially for applications aimed at discerning specific indica-
tions of disease within plant imagery.
We have developed a Vision Transformer (ViT) model, trained on a data set com-
posed of plant images, to categorize these images into distinct classes indicative of 
various plant diseases. The model employs an efficient transformer mechanism that 
is adept at processing the sequential nature of image patches, thereby capturing the 
nuanced local and global dependencies present within the image data.
To enhance the explainability of our ViT model, we have employed SHAP 
(SHapley Additive exPlanations), aiming to elucidate the elements within input 
images that significantly influence the model’s diagnostic predictions. This approach 
(8)𝜙i =
/uni2211.s1
M⊆N⧵{i}
/uni007C.varM/uni007C.var!⋅ (/uni007C.varN/uni007C.var− /uni007C.varM/uni007C.var− 1)!
/uni007C.varN/uni007C.var!
/bracketleft.s1fM∪{ i}(xM∪{ i})−f M (xM )/bracketright.s1
(9)l(b0)=/u1D7190 +
A/uni2211.s1
i=1
/u1D719ib0
i
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 20 of 32
involves calculating SHAP values, which measure the impact of each image patch 
(or pixel, for more detailed explanations) on the model’s categorization output.
Adapting SHAP for our model involved tailoring the explanation generation 
process to accommodate the Vision Transformer’s architecture. This necessitated 
modifications to target the output of intermediate or final layers for a comprehensive 
explanation. Using GradientExplainer, a SHAP variant optimized for models with 
inputs directly influencing their differentiable output, we generated SHAP values for 
a select portion of our test dataset, which included representations of various plant 
diseases.
The visualization of these SHAP values provided profound insight into the mod-
el’s decision-making criteria. Preliminary analysis suggested that specific image fea-
tures, such as textures, colours, and patterns, play pivotal roles in the model’s ability 
to identify certain plant diseases. These findings not only corroborate the model’s 
validity with agronomic principles, but also unveil novel patterns the model has 
discerned.
The elucidations provided by SHAP have significant practical implications for 
deploying our AI model in real-world scenarios. They facilitate expert verification 
of the model’s judgments, substantiate the model’s dependability, and offer guidance 
for model optimization by identifying potential biases or improvement avenues.
5.3  Explainability through SHAP
When we applied SHAP to our DeepViT model using their Gradient Explainer, we 
observed two notable properties of the SHAP value map we obtained. First, aside 
from the areas of the leaves that have disease spots on their surface the SHAP values 
also created clusters near the boundary of the leaves and at the corner of the images. 
Second, the shape values when plotted on a graph appeared as squares with visible 
and distinctive boundaries in some cases. Upon further observation, we discovered 
that the dimensions of the squares correspond to the patch size of our vision trans-
former model. The above observations prompted us to adjust the way we had imple-
mented SHAP for our DeepViT model, wherein we got some remarkable results 
when we took the mean of the SHAP values over the patches of the image. As per 
the colour map that we have taken, ‘blue’ represents ‘negative’ and ‘red’ represents 
‘positive’ SHAP values. Additionally, the intensity of the red or blue colour dictates 
the magnitude of the SHAP value. Thus, a deep-red colour represents a highly posi-
tive SHAP value and a deep-blue colour represents a highly negative SHAP value. 
As we have taken the mean of the SHAP values over each patch of the image, our 
results show whether a given patch has a positive or negative contribution towards 
the classification of the image instance into a certain class, and depth of blue or red 
colour shows the magnitude of that contribution. Through this, we are able to out-
line which features of the image contribute towards classification into certain classes 
of diseases.
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 21 of 32   280 
5.3.1  SHAP implementation on potato data
In the given example, a random image is taken from the potato data of plant vil-
lage dataset, and its SHAP results as plotted and shown in Fig.  7. In the above, we 
can see that the region of the leaf with disease marks has negative SHAP values in 
the case of the Healthy class and positive SHAP values in the case of the two dis-
ease classes. Meanwhile, a patch of the leaf that looks completely fine and has no 
symptoms of a disease contributes with negative SHAP values in the case of the two 
disease classes. As for the diseased area, since it matches closer to the late-blight 
class as compared to the early blight class, the intensity of the red is deeper i.e., the 
magnitude of the positive SHAP values is higher for the correct class. In addition to 
this, the instability as mentioned before can also be seen as the patches in the back -
ground, on the corners, and along the borders also have some SHAP values associ-
ated with them. The colour bar just below the plots signifies the colour associated 
with positive and negative SHAP values, as we have normalised the SHAP values 
to a range between 0 and 1, the negative values now start from zeroes, the SHAP 
values with very low magnitude are normalised to 0.5 and 1 signifies positive SHAP 
values with high magnitude. Figure  8 shows that the SHAP results in Potato Data 
are well explainable across all the classes.
5.3.2  SHAP implementation on tomato data
Here we have plotted the SHAP graphs randomly for the images in the Tomato Data 
within the Plant Village Dataset. In this case, we have an example of the Tomato 
Yellow Curl Virus, when afflicted by this disease some notable changes occur to the 
plant leaves: they curl upwards towards the inside of the leaf, they become thicker, 
and have a leathery texture, finally, the leaves become yellow near the veins this 
change is a result of interveinal chlorosis. In the results shown in Fig.  9, all disease 
classes except Yellow Curl Virus have negative SHAP values, signified by their blue 
colour, over the green part of the leaf, this is because unlike other diseases Yellow 
Curl Virus doesn’t lead to the leaf developing any kinds of spots or dead area on its 
surface, thus the absence of these features result in negative SHAP values over their 
respective pixel areas. This is also the reason why these green patches contribute 
Fig. 7  Example of SHAP output on Potato Data
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 22 of 32
positively towards the ‘Healthy’ class classification, as these areas of the leaf’s sur-
face are blemish-free. What distinguishes between the ‘Healthy’ class and the ‘Yel-
low Curl Virus’ class is the upward curls at the peripheries of the leaf and a pattern 
of yellowing towards its centre - attributed to interveinal chlorosis. This is reflected 
in the respective SHAP plots, where the red blocks - signifying positive values 
are limited to the greener patches on the leaf for the ’Healthy’ class, whereas the 
patches of the images that visually capture the yellow patterns about the leaf veins 
are marked by positive SHAP values in case of ’Yellow Curl Virus’, which also has 
the patches capturing the upward-curled borders of the leaves distinguished by the 
red blocks. The results for the Tomato Data also suffer from the instability that we 
talked about earlier for the Potato Data, nevertheless, the SHAP results are interpret-
able, as seen above, and provide insight into how the different areas (patches to be 
 Fig. 8  SHAP results across various classes of potato data
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 23 of 32   280 
precise) capture various features of the leaf’s surface and contribute to its classifica-
tion into the respective classes.
6  Experimental results and discussion
The objective of the experiment is to classify different plant diseases using a 
deep learning model. For this, we proposed a deep vision transformer model and 
applied it to the publicly available Plant Village dataset [49]. The classification 
of diseases was performed on two different plants, namely, potato and tomato. 
For the tomato dataset, classifications were performed in six subclasses such as 
bacterial spot, early blight, healthy, late blight, septoria leaf spot, and yellow leaf 
curl virus. However, the potato data set included three subclasses: Early blight, 
Healthy, and Late blight. These results were meticulously compared between dif-
ferent classes within the tomato and potato data sets, each comprising different 
subclasses and diseases.
For our experimental setup, we adopt a structured approach to data management, 
segmenting the ‘Tomato’ and ‘Potato’ images into training, validation, and testing 
processes. This segmentation follows a strategic split designed to optimize the learn-
ing process and evaluate the model’s performance comprehensively. Through this 
focused application of the DeepVit model on Tomato and Potato diseases within 
the PlantVillage dataset, our research endeavours to advance the field of plant dis-
ease identification, offering insights into the transformative potential of transformer 
learning technologies in agricultural contexts.
The proposed model was developed using deep vision transformer (Deep ViT) 
algorithms scripted in PyTorch. The supporting libraries used include Pandas, 
NumPy, Torchvision, Matplotlib, shap, etc. The model architecture begins by 
dividing each input image into fixed, nonoverlapping patches of size 32x32. These 
Fig. 9  Example of SHAP output on Tomato Data
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 24 of 32
patches are then passed through a linear projection to create embeddings. Positional 
embeddings are added to preserve the spatial context of the patches, ensuring that 
the model retains critical information about the relative position of each patch in the 
image. These positional embedded patches are fed into the Deep ViT architecture, 
where Re-Attention replaces the traditional Multi-Head Attention from the original 
Vision Transformer. Re-Attention regenerates attention maps, enhancing their diver-
sity across different transformer layers, while adding minimal computational and 
memory overhead. In our implementation, we used 8 attention heads for Re-Atten-
tion. The output from the transformer layers is passed through a feedforward neural 
network with a depth of four layers. Finally, the output of Deep ViT is directed to a 
multilayer perceptron (MLP) with a total of 2,048 perceptrons for the final predic-
tion. The model was trained using a learning rate of 3e-5 and a batch size of 64 for 
20 epochs, providing a robust framework to process data sets and achieve effective 
results.
The overall performance of both the crops has been shown in Table  5. The 
individual performances for potato and tomato data are shown in Tables  6 and  7 
to show the precision, recall, and F1 score of the model on the Healthy, Early 
Blight and Late Blight classes, calculated from the confusion matrix shown in 
Fig.  13. For the Potato data that’s all the three classes the model was trained on 
and for the Tomato data we have taken the model trained on six classes and pre-
sented a closer analysis of the three aforementioned classes by showing the val-
ues of Precision, Recall, and F1 score across these three classes. It is important 
to examine the results deeply across these three classes as visually they are quite 
similar. While, early blight and late blight cause the leaves to adopt a yellowish 
colour, in the early stages these changes are not very apparent. Additionally, both 
Early Blight and Late Blight cause spots and lesions to appear on the leaves, in 
Table 5  Performance 
Comparison Between Tomatoes 
and Potatoes Across All Classes
Plants Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
Tomato 93.56 93.58 93.54 93.55
Potato 99.95 99.95 99.95 99.95
Table 6  Performance 
comparison between Healthy, 
Early Blight, Late Blight 
Classes for Potato using 
DeepViT
Plant Class Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
Potato Healthy 99.95 100.00 100.00 100.00
Early Blight 99.50 99.80 99.65
Late Blight 99.30 99.60 99.45
Table 7  Performance 
comparison between Healthy, 
Early Blight, Late Blight 
Classes for Tomato using 
DeepViT
Plant Class Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
Tomato Healthy 93.56 94 93 93.5
Early Blight 94 93.8 93.9
Late Blight 93 94 93.5
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 25 of 32   280 
the early stages of the disease these spots look quite similar making it difficult to 
distinguish between the two, furthermore while the former two diseases cause the 
leaves to curl as the infection progresses especially around the infected area (dark 
spots and necrotic area around them), healthy leaves may also become curled due 
to environmental stress like excessive heat or water stress, thus it becomes dif-
ficult to tell if the leaves are curled due to disease or if it just an outcome of envi-
ronmental stress. While healthy leaves should look robust, minor nutrient defi-
ciencies or stress can sometimes cause leaves to appear weak, similar to the early 
symptoms of early blight or late blight. This makes the early stages of disease 
less apparent, and thus it becomes imperative to analyse the model’s performance 
across these diseases in detail. The results indicate that potatoes perform slightly 
better than tomatoes in these classification tasks. The accuracy of the classifica-
tion models was evaluated for each subclass within the respective datasets. The 
model achieved an accuracy of approximately 93.5% in classifying the six dif-
ferent tomato subclasses. In contrast, the classification of the three potato sub-
classes yielded a higher accuracy, approximately 99.95%, underscoring a more 
robust model performance in this context. In Table  8, MaxViT [59] achieves an 
accuracy of 97% however, we cannot confirm its performance on the testing data, 
moreover the RoC of the model indicates a one-vs-all classification setup which 
is much easier to train the model compared to a multi-class classifier. Similarly, 
ViT-1 [61] also lacks its performance evaluation on the testing data, moreover its 
training curve, and large number of training epochs coupled with lack of utiliza-
tion of any pre-processing or regularization techniques hints at over-fitting. The 
LeNet model suffers from its inability to deal with high-resolution and large-scale 
Table 8  Comparison of DeepVIT with other leading models for Tomato Data
Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score Parameters 
(in Millions)
Data 
Augmen-
tation
MaxViT [59] 97% 97% 97% 97% 300 Yes
LeNet [60] 94.0% 94.81% 94.78% 94.8% 2.1 Yes
ViT-1 [61] 98.51% 99.2% 99.3% 98.2% 2.06 No
ViT-SmartAgri [62] 90.99% 90% 89% 89% 13 No
DeepViT 93.56% 93.58 % 93.54% 93.55% 3.5 Yes
Table 9  Comparison of DeepVIT with other leading models for Potato Data
Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score Parameters 
(in Millions)
Data 
Augmen-
tation
EfficientRMT-Net [63] 97.6% 94.12% 94% 96.2% 8 Yes
SBCNN [64] 96.98% 94% 96% 95% 16 Yes
MobOca_Net [65] 97.73% 94.33% 94.33% 94.33% 3.5 Yes
DeepVIT 99.95% 99.95% 99.95% 99.95% 3.5 Yes
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 26 of 32
datasets, which limits its practicality, and although it achieves a decent perfor -
mance on validation data, its test performance cannot be confirmed. ViT-Smart-
Agri performs well overall but our model clearly surpasses it in performance due 
to the smart utilization of data pre-processing and augmenting techniques cou-
pled with the DeepViT architecture. The superior performance of the proposed 
DeepViT model is even more apparent in Table  9, where the model outperforms 
every other model in performance and space complexity (no. of parameters). In 
Table  10 we have compared our results with other latest model trained on the 
Plant Village Dataset, due to the challenges the dataset presents many methods 
opt for a binary classification model thereby limiting the scope and effective-
ness of their work. The observed binary classification paradigms include healthy 
vs unhealthy binary classifier and one vs all binary classifier. Moreover, some 
of the compared methods like E-GreenNet [48] and Small-Inception [46] have 
omitted image augmentation, pre-processing or regularization techniques which 
raise concern of overfitting on their trained model given the absence of gener -
alization or testing error. In transfer learning approaches methods like PDDNet 
[47] the models become very large and thus highly resource intensive which can 
be problematic for deployment on edge devices or in environments with limited 
Table 10  Comparison of DeepVIT with other recent models on Plant Village
Model Accuracy Description Year Data Set
E-GreenNet [48] 99.8% Healthy vs Infected, Binary Classification 2024 Plant Village
Small-Inception [46] 94.04% Healthy vs Unhealthy, Binary Classification 2024 Plant Village
PDDNet-Tomato [47] 91.14% One-vs-All Tomato Disease, Averaged 2024 Plant Village
DeepVIT 93.56% Tomato Data, Six Classes 2024 Plant Village
DeepVIT 99.95% Potato Data, Three Classes 2024 Plant Village
Fig. 10  Potato Training and Validation accuracy
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 27 of 32   280 
computational resources. Finally, some of these binary classification models lack 
practicality as it is inefficient to create an application of plant disease identifi-
cation system around binary classifiers since the user may receive conflicting 
answers. Thus, the proposed model shows state-of-the-art performance when 
Fig. 11  Potato ROC and AUC for the proposed Transformer Learning model
Fig. 12  Tomato Training and Validation accuracy
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 28 of 32
compared to both novel and well-established methods, and explainability (XAI) 
through SHAP, further this increases the trustworthiness and transparency of the 
proposed model. 
The training and validation accuracy of both datasets were shown in Figs.  10, 
11 and  12 The AUC of ROC of the proposed model is 0.95, shown in Fig.  11, 
which is much higher than the threshold level (i.e., 0.5). This is a clear indication 
of the least trade-off between sensitivity and specificity of the model and can be 
considered as a good grade of classification [66].
7  Conclusion
This research work introduces deep vision transformer and explainable AI in the 
field of agriculture. The proposed architecture improves the early identification of 
plant diseases for individuals without expertise in plant pathology, by using the pro-
posed DeepViT model to identify diseases in tomato and potato leaves. In the exper-
iments, we have achieved accuracy rates of 93.56% for tomatoes and 99.95% for 
potatoes as shown in Tables  8 and  9. Additionally, we have incorporated the SHAP 
algorithm that makes the proposed model explainable and enhances the transpar -
ency of the model decision-making process. Future research will focus on imple-
menting the model in a manner that reduces the need for manual involvement in 
identifying plant diseases. We will prioritize the development of a user-friendly sys-
tem to streamline operations, particularly for the agricultural community. The model 
will be further refined and integrated with big data analytic tools in cloud computing 
services to monitor and analyse disease patterns in other crops, ensuring a compre-
hensive and efficient approach to plant disease management.
Author contributions P.K. proposed the idea using deep learning and make the team implement this and 
proof reading. S.K. contributed in developing the framework and writes the code in pytorch, implement 
and deploy the code. P.S. and A.S. contributes in write up of Literature review, and Introduction and 
Fig. 13  Confusion matrices for (a) potato and (b) tomato
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 29 of 32   280 
running experiments on XAI. M.K.S. contributed in proposing XAI on image dataset, organizing the 
paper and final writeup. A.D. helps in review the paper. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.
References
 1. Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India, Annual reports, 696 2024. 
https:// agriw elfare. gov. in/ en/ Annual, published: 26-07-2024.
 2. U. Mokhtar, N. El Bendary, A. E. Hassenian, E. Emary, M. A. Mahmoud, H. Hefny, M. F. Tolba, 
Svm-based detection of tomato leaves diseases, in: Intelligent Systems’ 2014: Proceedings of the 
7th IEEE International Conference Intelligent Systems IS’2014, September 24-26, 2014, Warsaw, 
Poland, Volume 2: Tools, Architectures, Systems, Applications, Springer, 2015, 641–652
 3. S. Verma, A. Chug, A. P. Singh, Prediction models for identification and diagnosis of tomato plant 
diseases, in: 2018 International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Infor-
matics (ICACCI), 2018, 10.1109/ICACCI.2018.8554842
 4. H. Poojary, S. B. Shabari, A survey on plant disease detection using support vector machine, in: 
2018 International Conference on Control, Power, Communication and Computing Technologies 
(ICCPCCT), 2018, pp. 292–295. 10.1109/ICCPCCT.2018.8574314
 5. B. S. Prajapati, V. K. Dabhi, H. B. Prajapati, A survey on detection and classification of cotton leaf 
diseases, in: 2016 International Conference on Electrical, Electronics, and Optimization Techniques 
(ICEEOT), 2016, pp. 2499–2506. 10.1109/ICEEOT.2016.7755143
 6. C. G. Dhaware, K. Wanjale, A modern approach for plant leaf disease classification which depends 
on leaf image processing, in: 2017 International Conference on Computer Communication and 
Informatics (ICCCI), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–4
 7. Nayak JPR, Anitha K, Parameshachari BD, Banu R, Rashmi P (2017) Pcb fault detection using 
image processing. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 225:012244. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1088/ 1757- 899X/ 225/1/ 012244
 8. Singh AK, Ganapathysubramanian B, Sarkar S, Singh A (2018) Deep learning for plant stress phe-
notyping: trends and future perspectives. Trends plant sci. 23(10):883–98
 9. LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature 521:436–44. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
natur e14539
 10. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2017) Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neu-
ral networks. Commun ACM 60:84–90
 11. M. Brahimi, M. Arsenovic, S. Laraba, S. Sladojevic, K. Boukhalfa, A. Moussaoui, Deep learning 
for plant diseases: detection and saliency map visualisation, Human and machine learning: Visible, 
explainable, trustworthy and transparent (2018) 93–117
 12. Maurício J, Domingues I, Bernardino J (2023) Comparing vision transformers and convolutional 
neural networks for image classification: A literature review. Appl Sci 13:5521
 13. G. Singh, A critical analysis of convolutional neural networks for leaf disease detection in plants, 
in: Artificial Intelligence and Smart Agriculture: Technology and Applications, Springer, 2024, 
461–493
 14. Khalid MM, Karan O (2024) Deep learning for plant disease detection, International Journal of 
Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer. Science 2:75–84
 15. Najim MH, Abdulateef SK, Alasadi AH (2024) Early detection of tomato leaf diseases based on 
deep learning techniques. Int J Artif Intell 13:509–515
 16. Singh V, Sharma N, Singh S (2020) A review of imaging techniques for plant disease detection. 
Artif Intell Agric 4:229–242
 17. Sandhu GK, Kaur R, Plant disease detection techniques: a review, in, (2019) international confer -
ence on automation, computational and technology management (ICACTM). IEEE 2019:34–38
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 30 of 32
 18. Bashir K, Rehman M, Bari M (2019) Detection and classification of rice diseases: An automated 
approach using textural features, Mehran University Research Journal of. Eng Technol 38:239–250
 19. A.  N.  I. Masazhar, M.  M. Kamal, Digital image processing technique for palm oil leaf dis-
ease detection using multiclass svm classifier, in: 2017 IEEE 4th International Conference on 
Smart Instrumentation, Measurement and Application (ICSIMA), 2017, pp. 1–6. 10.1109/
ICSIMA.2017.8311978
 20. Abed S, Esmaeel AA (2018) A novel approach to classify and detect bean diseases based on image 
processing, in. IEEE Symp Computer Appl Ind Elect (ISCAIE) 2018:297–302. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1109/ ISCAIE. 2018. 84054 88
 21. Kaur S, Pandey S, Goel S (2018) Semi-automatic leaf disease detection and classification system for 
soybean culture. IET Image Proc 12:1038–1048
 22. H. Wang, G. Li, Z. Ma, X. Li, Application of neural networks to image recognition of plant diseases, 
in: 2012 International Conference on Systems and Informatics (ICSAI2012), 2012, pp. 2159–2164. 
10.1109/ICSAI.2012.6223479
 23. Khirade SD, Patil A (2015) Plant disease detection using image processing, in. Int Conf Comput 
Commun Control Autom 2015:768–771. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCUB EA. 2015. 153
 24. Zhang S, Zhu Y, You Z, Wu X (2017) Fusion of superpixel, expectation maximization and phog for 
recognizing cucumber diseases. Computers Electr Agri 140:338–347
 25. S.  S. Sannakki, V.  S. Rajpurohit, V.  B. Nargund, P.  Kulkarni, diagnosis and classification of 
grape leaf diseases using neural networks, in: 2013 Fourth International Conference on Com-
puting, Communications and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 2013, pp. 1–5. 10.1109/
ICCCNT.2013.6726616
 26. A. Rastogi, R. Arora, S. Sharma, Leaf disease detection and grading using computer vision tech-
nology & fuzzy logic, in: 2015 2nd International Conference on Signal Processing and Integrated 
Networks (SPIN), 2015, pp. 500–505. 10.1109/SPIN.2015.7095350
 27. Oo YM, Htun NC (2018) Plant leaf disease detection and classification using image processing. Int 
J Res Eng 5:516–523
 28. Harakannanavar SS, Rudagi JM, Puranikmath VI, Siddiqua A, Pramodhini R (2022) Plant leaf 
disease detection using computer vision and machine learning algorithms. Global Trans Proc 
3:305–310
 29. Barburiceanu S, Meza S, Orza B, Malutan R, Terebes R (2021) Convolutional neural networks for 
texture feature extraction applications to leaf disease classification in precision agriculture. IEEE 
Access 9:160085–160103
 30. Singh V, Misra A (2017) Detection of plant leaf diseases using image segmentation and soft com-
puting techniques. Inf Proc Agri 4:41–49
 31. Maniyath SR, Vinod PV, Niveditha M, Pooja R, Shashank N, Hebbar R., Plant disease detection 
using machine learning, in, et al (2018) International conference on design innovations for 3Cs com-
pute communicate control (ICDI3C). IEEE 2018:41–45. 10.1109/ICDI3C.2018.00017
 32. Arnal Barbedo JG (2019) Plant disease identification from individual lesions and spots using deep 
learning. Biosyst Eng 180:96–107
 33. Fuentes A, Yoon S, Kim SC, Park DS (2017) A robust deep-learning-based detector for real-time 
tomato plant diseases and pests recognition. Sensors 17(9):2022
 34. Ferentinos KP (2018) Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis. Comput Elect 
Agri 145:311–318
 35. Fawakherji M, Youssef A, Bloisi D, Pretto A, Nardi D (2019) Crop and weeds classification for 
precision agriculture using context-independent pixel-wise segmentation, in. Third IEEE Int Conf 
Robotic Computing (IRC) 2019:146–152. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ IRC. 2019. 00029
 36. Zhang X, Qiao Y, Meng F, Fan C, Zhang M (2018) Identification of maize leaf diseases using 
improved deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE Access 6:30370–30377. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1109/ ACCESS. 2018. 28444 05
 37. Sunil CK, Jaidhar CD, Patil N (2021) Cardamom plant disease detection approach using Efficient-
NetV2. Ieee Access. 10:789–804
 38. Vishnoi VK, Kumar K, Kumar B, Mohan S, Khan AA (2023) Detection of apple plant diseases 
using leaf images through convolutional neural network. IEEE Access 11:6594–6609. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1109/ ACCESS. 2022. 32329 17
 39. Eddy P, Smith A, Hill B, Peddle D, Coburn C, Blackshaw R (2006) Comparison of neural net-
work and maximum likelihood high resolution image classification for weed detection in crops: 
DVTXAI: a novel deep vision transformer with an explainable…
Page 31 of 32   280 
Applications in precision agriculture. In2009 IEEE Int Symposium Geosci Remote Sensing. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1109/ IGARSS. 2006. 35
 40. Mohanty SP, Hughes DP, Salathé M (2016) Using deep learning for image-based plant disease 
detection. Frontiers Plant Sci 7:1419
 41. Khattak AM, Asghar MU, Batool U, Asghar MZ, Ullah H, Al-Rakhami MS, Gumaei AH (2021) 
Automatic detection of citrus fruit and leaves diseases using deep neural network model. IEEE 
Access 9:112942–112954
 42. Hassan S, Maji A (2022) Plant disease identification using a novel convolutional neural network. 
IEEE Access. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ACCESS. 2022. 31413 71
 43. Zhou C, Zhou S, Xing J, Song J (2021) Tomato leaf disease identification by restructured deep 
residual dense network. IEEE Access. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ACCESS. 2021. 30589 47
 44. A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, N. Houlsby, An 
image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale, arXiv preprint arXiv: 
2010. 11929 (2020)
 45. Shafik W, Tufail A, De Silva Liyanage C, Apong RAAHM (2024) Using transfer learning-based 
plant disease classification and detection for sustainable agriculture. BMC Plant Biology 24:136
 46. I. Bouacida, B. Farou, L. Djakhdjakha, H. Seridi, M. Kurulay, Innovative deep learning approach 
for cross-crop plant disease detection: A generalized method for identifying unhealthy leaves, Infor-
mation Processing in Agriculture (2024)
 47. Shafik W, Tufail A, Liyanage CDS et al (2024) Using transfer learning-based plant disease classifi-
cation and detection for sustainable agriculture. BMC Plant Biol 24(1):136
 48. Adekunle TS, Lawrence MO, Alabi OO, Afolorunso AA, Ebong GN, Oladipupo MA (2024) Deep 
learning technique for plant disease detection. Computer Sci Inf Technol 5(1):55–62
 49. T.  Sharma, Plant village dataset (updated), 2024. https:// www. kaggle. com/ datas ets/ tusha r5har ma/ 
plant- villa ge- datas et- updat ed
 50. Geetharamani G, Pandian A (2019) Identification of plant leaf diseases using a nine-layer deep con-
volutional neural network. Computer Elect Eng 76:323–38
 51. D. Zhou, B. Kang, X. Jin, L. Yang, X. Lian, Z. Jiang, Q. Xie, J. Feng, Deepvit: Towards deeper 
vision transformer, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2103. 11886 (2021)
 52. A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, 
M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al., An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image 
recognition at scale, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2010. 11929 (2020)
 53. A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, 
Attention is all you need, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017)
 54. Siddiqui MK, Huang X, Morales-Menendez R, Hussain N, Khatoon K (2020) Machine learning 
based novel cost-sensitive seizure detection classifier for imbalanced EEG data sets. Int J Interact 
Design Manuf(IJIDeM) 14:1491–1509. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s12008- 020- 00715-3
 55. Siddiqui MK, Morales-Menendez R, Huang X, Hussain N (2020) A review of epileptic seizure 
detection using machine learning classifiers. Brain informatics 7:1–18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
s40708- 020- 00105-1
 56. Streiner DL, Cairney J (2007) What’s under the ROC? an introduction to receiver operating charac-
teristics curves. Can J Psychiatry 52:121–128
 57. Siddiqui MK, Morales-Menendez R, Ahmad S (2020) Application of receiver operating characteris-
tics (ROC) on the prediction of obesity. Braz Arch Biol Technol. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1590/ 1678- 4324- 
20201 90736
 58. S. M. Lundberg, S.-I. Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, Advances in neural 
information processing systems 30 (2017)
 59. Hossain S, Tanzim Reza M, Chakrabarty A, Jung YJ (2023) Aggregating different scales of atten-
tion on feature variants for tomato leaf disease diagnosis from image data: A transformer driven 
study. Sensors 23:3751
 60. P. Tm, A. Pranathi, K. SaiAshritha, N. B. Chittaragi, S. G. Koolagudi, Tomato leaf disease detection 
using convolutional neural networks, in: 2018 Eleventh International Conference on Contemporary 
Computing (IC3), 2018, pp. 1–5. 10.1109/IC3.2018.8530532
 61. Boukabouya RA, Moussaoui A, Berrimi M, Vision transformer based models for plant disease 
detection and diagnosis, in, (2022) 5th International Symposium on Informatics and its Applications 
(ISIA). IEEE 2022:1–6
 S. Kamal et al.
  280  Page 32 of 32
 62. Barman U, Sarma P, Rahman M, Deka V, Lahkar S, Sharma V, Saikia MJ (2024) Vit-smartagri: 
Vision transformer and smartphone-based plant disease detection for smart agriculture. Agronomy 
14:327
 63. Shaheed K, Qureshi I, Abbas F, Jabbar S, Abbas Q, Ahmad H, Sajid MZ (2023) Efficientrmt-net-an 
efficient resnet-50 and vision transformers approach for classifying potato plant leaf diseases. Sen-
sors 23:9516
 64. Barman U, Sahu D, Barman GG, Das J (2020) Comparative assessment of deep learning to detect 
the leaf diseases of potato based on data augmentation, in. Int Conf Comput Perf Evaluation 
(ComPE) 2020:682–687. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ComPE 49325. 2020. 92000 15
 65. Chen W, Chen J, Zeb A, Yang S, Zhang D (2022) Mobile convolution neural network for the recog-
nition of potato leaf disease images. Multimed Tools Appl 81:20797–20816
 66. D. W. Hosmer Jr, S. Lemeshow, R. X. Sturdivant, Applied logistic regression, volume 398, John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under 
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.
Authors and Affiliations
Sadia Kamal1 · Parth Sharma2 · P . K. Gupta4 · Mohammad Khubeb Siddiqui2,5 · 
Ankush Singh3 · Abhijit Dutt1
 * Mohammad Khubeb Siddiqui 
 khubeb@ieee.org
 Sadia Kamal 
 sadia1402@umbc.edu
 Parth Sharma 
 211106@juitsolan.in
 P. K. Gupta 
 pkgupta@ieee.org
 Ankush Singh 
 211156@juitsolan.in
 Abhijit Dutt 
 adutt@umbc.edu
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
Baltimore, USA
2 Artificial Intelligence Practice, IBM Australia, 256 George Street, Sydney 2000, Australia
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jaypee University of Information 
Technology, Waknaghat, Solan, HP 173 234, India
4 School of Computing, Department of Data Science, Mohan Babu University, Tirupati, 
AP 517102, India
5 Digital Transformation, SABIC, Jubail, Saudi Arabia